Arina Koltsova
Kiev
Head of the “Samooborona” of Solomyansky district of Kiev

I arrived at the very beginning, on the first of December. While students were out getting beaten, I was sitting in “Mafia” on Khreshchatyk (the main street running through Kiev, Ukraine). It was night time. And when I walked out I saw everything with my own eyes. I ran back in terror, and from that moment on I started to care. 

The next day I was already on the Maidan (the Maidan refers to the central square in Kiev. It has traditionally been the location for political rallies in Ukraine). Dressed like a bum in what I could spare. And I was there virtually every night. 

In 2004, during the Orange Revolution (а peaceful political rally, which took place on the Maidan in 2004, to overturn allegedly rigged election results. It was a major success and a second, more carefully watched round of voting replaced Viktor Yanukovych, President during these more recent protests, with Viktor Yushchenko), I really didn’t give a shit about any of it. 

I love people who, seeing something they don’t like, talk about it, go out and start doing something about it, and don’t sit around like the rest of the herd. But I was busy with other things, the revolution was just going on somewhere nearby. But this time it didn’t go like that, the instant I saw it with my own eyes, I was hooked! Injustice tends to have that effect. 

In the center of the city, the capital, people were beaten because they came out to express their opinions. They were beating people up without any right to do so. That should not be. Everyone has to answer for their own actions. And that’s why I went to the Maidan and spent three some-odd months there.

When I got to the Maidan there still weren’t any tents up, there were barrels. Medication, firewood, and food was brought in, all on our own dime. Mostly I worked at the kitchen where we cooked soups, pilaf, and kulish (а traditional Ukrainian soup). We peeled potatoes in the cold.
 

But if we had to go build barricades on Hrushevksoho (the spot of many clashes between police and protestors during the Maidan protests), I went and built barricades; if we had to take them down, I went and took them down. I worked with a chainsaw, with my hands, and as a driver. I carried out the wounded during two raids on the Maidan. During the third I was in the emergency room, taking in the wounded.


From December 10th to the 11th, during the first raid on the Maidan, when Kievans closed in ranks to defend the Maidan, when in a couple hours two thousand people all of a sudden became ten thousand, I also showed up. Cars weren’t allowed through, so we ditched them on the street and walked. 

To tell the truth, the first raid was extremely scary. I’ve never been more afraid. I grabbed a motorcycle helmet. It was 8 or 10 below freezing (14-18 degrees Fahrenheit), noticeably cold. I broke through and stood on the barricade near the trade-union buildings with the guys. But then they realized that I was a girl and kicked me out of there. 

I joined up with the medics near the Central Post Office where there was a medical support station set up. People were being carried there and we treated them.  There were only a few injured, thank God.

The second raid on Hrushevskoho was more complicated; I had just flown in from Norway, I get home, throw down my bag, change into my Maidan gear, and go straight to the barricades! I stood on the very first barricade for a few nights. It was bitter cold. It must have been 18 below at that point. No, 23 below (0 and -10 degrees Fahrenheit, respectively). 

I tried to be there at night, because during the day I felt uneasy. When the sun came up, all kinds of “tourists” began showing up asking to take pictures with us, not letting us exhausted people have a bite to eat. You’re sitting there, grimy, next to a barrel, eating with your dirty hands, and they tug on you saying: “Please, take a photo with us”. I really didn’t like that, so I left at sunrise. 

Then from work I went back again. In my normal life I’m the superintendent of a hotel complex. I don’t remember sleeping more than two hours. Dark and dirty with sunken eyes, under my cap you couldn’t tell what I was. Basically, it was really rough.

Even though I tried to get out of there in the mornings, I was still pestered by “Euronews” and radio “Svoboda”…I was doing interviews for everyone all over the place in Russian, English, and Ukrainian. When it was possible to drive, I drove. My car was behind the barricades on the same side as the trade-union buildings. When I started receiving threats, I put the car away. 



Threats that I would be set on fire along with my car started popping up on a fake account on Vkontakte (a popular social networking site, popular in Russia and Ukraine. It is similar to Facebook). They uploaded photos that were taken from my page. So, my friends quickly hid away my car – thank you to them for that. I carried on taking the metro. Some guys drove buses to the Maidan, they gave me a ride on more than one occasion.


When there was a lot of action I had on three pairs of pants, four sweaters, two coats, a vest, a hood, a cap, goggles, and a gas mask. At that point it simply didn’t matter how you looked, no one gave a damn. We pulled cinder blocks out with our hands and built barricades, our hands were constantly tattered and torn. 


Come to think of it, I got lucky. I only came away with one scar from the Maidan, some equipment dug into my hand when I was building a barricade. Other than that, I’m still in one piece, thank God. Naturally, I saw a lot of stuff that no one should ever have to see – torn hip muscles, empty eye sockets, open-skull brain trauma, open fractures.


From February 18th to the 21st, I was on duty at the emergency room for three days and three nights, and another night at Hospital No.3 on Petra Zaporozhtsa Street. I didn’t have a car at that time; it was hidden away. And I couldn’t get to the Maidan, I really wanted to, but I couldn’t. But then I realized that it would probably be more beneficial for me to donate blood at night on the 18th and stay on as a volunteer. It wasn’t scary anymore. It was just really tough. And I actually couldn’t sleep at all.


Recently, a lot of people have left the Maidan, people who stood for the idea of it. The best of the Maidan went back to their homes because they have families, kids, and business. Some left forever. Some went to Germany, or Poland, or Czech Republic to receive treatment. From our tent “Rivnenshchyna” (Rovenshchyna [Ukrainian]) (when I arrived at the tent Rivnenshchyna on December 1st, there were just a bunch of barrels around, everyone got to know each other, and then a tent was set up on the spot) four people died, I think around fifteen are under treatment, some with a fractured foot, some with bullet wounds, some without eyes.


Every night on the Maidan I had the exact same feeling, that I was on a different planet, in another world, because, looking around, it was unreal: in the center of the city people are sitting with dirty faces, fires are burning, people are singing. The hymn is a different story. I know the hymn by heart now. And not just me. It was strange. And awesome. It changed something deep within me.


Now I have the right to be proud of myself. Essentially, I have something to respect myself for. Without false modesty I can say that I did not chicken out. I did what I had to do. I witnessed many acts of personal heroism around me when people shielded each other with their own bodies. 



There was a young guy, 27 or 28, a little pipsqueak, he came in from Kamyanets-Podilsky because, like me, he was taken aback by the injustice. It grabbed and dragged him all the way to the Maidan. He came with his friend. His friend got lost, and the young man sat with us next to the barrels at first, then next to the tent, then I saw him for the last time on Hrushevskoho and heard incredible things about him. 


He had long hair, he was very dirty, in this gear…He looked like Baba Yaga (а decrepit and deformed old woman from Slavic folklore). His eyes were burning, his teeth and everything else was black. His feet wrapped-up in magazines… He walks ahead of everyone else, grabs a bottle (young girls carried in a case of Molotov cocktails), sets it on fire, calmly comes up to the line and throws it… 


There is a row of rubber bullets being fired from the other side. He takes another, sets it on fire, practically touching the shields as he approaches them, throws the bottle, it explodes, and right there he gets a phone call. Throughout all of this they’re continuing to fire on him. He reaches into his pocket, takes out his phone and says: “Romochka, I’ll call you back. I’m a little busy right now.”. He calmly switches off his phone, calmly turns back and leaves.


I was in the tent where they were making Molotov cocktails. A very plain little tent stood, practically under the monument  (а monument to the independence of Ukraine depicting Berehynia, a female figure in Slavic Myth, stands in the center of Kiev’s Independence Square), unmarked, with a couple flags, just like on every tent. Four people were sitting in there, it was clear that they were military officers. They were older. They were making the Molotov cocktails. 


I brought them something to eat; I brought kanapki (sandwiches) and tea. The guys were saying in Ukrainian: “Ten years will pass, I’ll go home, get married, I’ll have kids, and every night I’ll jump up and shout: “sandwiches, tea, coffee!”.


Afterwards some Ukrainians were sitting around, chatting, and one older Armenian guy says “Ah, I had money and gold, everything was in an envelope, it was taped up in my pocket. And during the raid the Berkut (Ukrainian riot police) got into my pockets, beat me up and took me to jail. No money, no gold.” Another guy says: “You know what, I get it, we’re Ukrainians and you’re Armenian, how could you screw up like that by going there with all your belongings? You’re Armenian for God’s sake, how could you do that? – “In that moment I was Ukrainian.” That was really deep. It hit home. 


The Maidan will be in my heart forever. Now I’m in the Solomenskiy Guard, a community organization, formerly the local defense group of the Solomenskiy district, that takes on the functions of the police by  patrolling the neighborhood when the police are inactive. There are stickers with our telephone numbers pasted everywhere, people call us asking for help, then we go and help. I’m the coordinator on Zello, on the radio and on the phone.



These guys are heroes. They don’t sleep, they don’t eat normally, they live in a state of… every night people come to them, a robbery – people come, shootings – people come, any sort of captures, explosions… When I went out on calls (from the beginning I went out on calls too), they gave me a bullet-proof vest because I was the driver, just in case. And I got the bullet-proof vest after one of the other guys. There were some bullet holes in it.


The Solomenskiy RSA (Regional State Administration) gives us help: sometimes they fill up our tanks or feed us. But, for the most part it’s on our own dime. The guys go on patrol on their own dime too. And they risked their lives on their own initiative. They’re students. At architecture school (Kyiv National University of Construction and Architecture), or NAU (National Aviation University), some of us are lawyers, some retired military men. There’s a student at the Kyiv National University of Culture and Art. Just regular kids who actually care.


Clearly, I’ve gotten my fill of romanticism. I’m proud that I’m Ukrainian. For the first time in my life. I’m proud to be from Kiev. People from Kiev represented themselves very well. I’m just proud of my city.


As for Crimea…I think we’ll get Crimea back. I went to the Maidan desperately wanting to make a change. Sure it was small, but we had a victory nonetheless. We did it with our own hands. If you really want something deep down, if you really believe in it…This is our land.

Jul 15 2014
