Andrey Volokita
Kharkiv
Enterpreneur

The views of Kharkovites [citizens of Kharkov, a city in eastern Ukraine] never changed. 90% or more are for a united Ukraine. There is simply an active segment, 5 percent from either side: 5 percent pro-Russians and 5 percent of those are prepared to defend and prove what’s clear.

You can walk around on the streets with a Ukrainian flag, you can say that Ukraine is united, but that’s all bullshit! It’s like going out and saying in Russia, in Moscow, that Russia is united and everything else.

The active pro-Ukrainian faction has now come into full force, all sorts of grassroots movements, what is referred to as civil society, are popping up. They are strong enough to put the separatists in their place. That said, in the past week, literally a few days ago, the police finally started working against these separatists; they found some conspiratorial apartment and chased them out. 

They set up a little tent city, these separatists, on the center square near Lenin (a large statue of Lenin stands in Kharkov’s “Freedom Square”). But that very day they were driven out, some were arrested. Before this the police were just standing around doing nothing, going through the motions. 

Now we’ve got a new police chief, Avakov [the Minister of Internal Affairs of Ukraine] appointed him. He’s made some new nominations; there really are some true patriots up in the ranks. It’s difficult to pick out the ordinary working patriots from the huge number of policemen. It’s not written on their faces.

There have been other changes, too. We have some traffic cops, policemen who contrived to walk around with those ribbons of St. George. This was going on for a long time, but then Avakov said: “You either turn in your badge, or you only wear Ukrainian insignia.” And that was that, now there are cars with a little Ukrainian flag or a flag sticker pasted on. It’s already more cheerful. 


The city is covered in Ukrainian flags. People are even hanging flags on some of the stores. There are no Russia flags, and, in my opinion, even the separatists don’t have them anymore.

Concerning the central authority, we have a Regional State Administration which is subject to the President by law, according to the old constitution. How it is in the new constitution I still don’t know. They say they’re pretty much going to get rid of it. But, that’s not important, for now this is how it is. The head of the regional administration is appointed by the president, naturally, in accordance with these policies. And that’s pretty much the central authority. 

But on the other side there’s the governance of the city’s authority, for the most part that’s the mayor Kernes, For a time Kernes had separatist sympathies, pro-Russian ones. He’s a businessman at heart, the man does business immaculately and loves Kharkov, that’s the truth.

Kernes made sure work was done on community facilities, he made Gorky Park, and the roads were repaired too. Stuff that is normal for people in the West, but for us is an accomplishment, like markings appearing on the roads. In fact, if you drive throughout Ukraine, there aren’t many cities like Kharkov, with such developed infrastructure, with the quality of the roads, the clean streets and so on. It’s even more pleasant to drive on the roads in Kharkov than in Kiev.

So Kernes, as an executive, fulfilled all his primary obligations, but go figure with him. He supported separatist sentiments, that is, he publicly stated that he was for a united Ukraine, but at the same time separatists flourished in Kharkov. There were some violent episodes between pro-Russian demonstrations and pro-Ukrainian rallies. I was at these rallies myself, it was… simply put, they sparked hooliganism. 

The police were there, and a bunch of us pro-Ukrainians stood there with flags, 200 or 300, not many. Just as many separatists. But 200 of them had baseball bats, they were in masks, and they simply walked around the police and marched on us. There was no provocation from our side whatsoever, it was such stupid, cynical violence, I can’t wrap my head around it. I feel like they were definitely paid for this. 

The order was that they had to beat people up, so they went and beat people. When the “Ultras” (radical supporters of soccer clubs) went to soccer games, they were pretty much unarmed. They didn’t plan on beating up anyone. But the separatists came out just looking to beat people up. They came out specifically to instigate a fight. But in the end they themselves were walloped.

But Kernes, like I said before, is above all a businessman, and there’s no point in thinking that he will put his heart into one party or another. Kernes is doing and saying whatever he must, without scruples, and some people love him for that, and some people don’t. But Kernes’s latest announcement, just the other day there was a city council meeting, he said that Ukraine is united, indivisible. There aren’t going to be any freakin’ referendums. 

That is, he said that there would be a referendum, but I don’t even remember what about, something insignificant. Along the lines of including Russian channels or not, something like that. Nothing about Kharkov being separate from Ukraine.

In Kharkov, a vast majority speaks Russian. And that’s exactly why all these accusations that they are being oppressed there is absurd. That’s all so far-fetched… But when Yanukovich (the former President of Ukraine that fled during the Maidan protests) was overthrown and they immediately voted in parliament to abolish the law on the status of the Russian language, that’s a different story. 

The law could’ve been passed by region, but instead they completely did away with it. This really outraged people, because, first of all, it was not the time or the place, there were a bunch of other problems, but they started on issues of nationality… 

And second of all, you know, it’s like… well when someone is sick, you can only barely touch him, and even that will annoy him. That’s exactly what happened. So it’s one thing if they said to people in a calm environment: you know, this law is flawed, let’s discuss it, let’s pass some other law. But taking into account that all this was going on in such tense circumstances, this was the push that tipped the scales for a lot of people. 

A lot of people, you can’t say everyone. It was distressing to those who have no damn chance of learning other languages. I’ve got an acquaintance, he’s a professor, and he cannot learn a single other language. Naturally, this was distressing to him. Our own Avakov too, you can see, is pathologically incapable of learning languages. 

Ah, more about the question of the authorities. Kernes, as a strong mayor, managed to get everyone work, despite a lack of funds. A very complex managerial task stood in front of him, and he resolved it. But to do so he did some political schmoozing with some of the pro-Russians… 

Apparently there was pressure from Russia, but, from the other side of it he understood that if the same thing happens like it did in Donetsk (one of the biggest and most important cities in Ukraine, located close to the Russian border, Dontesk has declared itself separate from Ukraine), that’s not what he freakin’ needs. He didn’t want that mess, that chaos. You have to take into account his personal interest, because he has business here. So Ukraine’s interests and Kernes’s interests coincided.
But Baluta, for example, appointed the head of the Regional Administration by the governor, did zilch. He arrived on the first day the Regional Administration was liberated, and instead of creating checkpoints, organizing the police, social movements, self-defense units, etc., he picked up and went to do agriculture stuff. 

He went to Krasnohrad District, he had a friend there or something. Complete bullshit. What kind of governor does that, at a time when he needs to start making a whole lot of decisive steps, even if they’re going to be flawed, you have to do something, do something, try something, but he does nothing.
I’ll give you an example. We went to the Vinnytsia guys [Vinnytsia is an ancient city in west-central Ukraine], to the “Jaguar” [the Ministry of the Interior’s special forces, on the night of the 7th of April to the morning of the 8th of April, 2014, they carried out an operation to liberate the Kharkov Regional Government Administration from the separatists – editor’s note], right after they liberated the Regional Administration. 

We understood how everything was going to be, it was the same with us, people might be without food, without clothes, have nowhere to sleep… In fact it turned out that it wasn’t so bad, because Avakov worked on this a bit. He took them under his wing. 

We came a day after the liberation of the Regional Administration, and that day their buses were attacked. You probably saw when citizens with pro-Russian sentiments were completely destroying two buses with sticks, batons, and rocks. We went to find out what the guys needed. 

They said: everything’s fine, but they destroyed our buses, we already got an estimate, we’re ready to get them fixed up. I asked them: but there’s the Regional Administration, they really can’t give you any help? They said: yeah we went to Baluta, but he said there’s no money. And that’s the attitude. I mean, these are the people who, in point of fact, are defending him! I have to believe them, I saw their reaction when after two days we repaired their buses for them, they were so pleased and happy. It’s not likely they were making that stuff up. 

I mean, this is the Baluta we’ve got. Although, he sort of used to do business. But you know how a lot of people become businessmen. The father is the director of a factory, and the son is a businessman. 90% of our oligarchs are these. If you take a look, 99% of the oligarchs have never built anything new at all. Including Akhmetov [Rinat Akhmetov - one of the richest men in Ukraine, founder of System Capital Management]. This man simply accumulated resources that were produced during the Soviet Union, and bought them for pennies. 

Of course, Poroshenko (confectionary magnate and now President of Ukraine) is different in this sense. That is, he, on the other hand, had practically the same origins, but he has actually produced quite a bit. He has built factories, and in general his community work has been extensive.
People in Kharkov, for the most part, like Poroshenko. Although a lot of people say: I would vote for Yarosh (leader of the far-right “Praviy Sektor” Party), but he probably won’t make the cut, so I’m going to vote for Poroshenko. 

People in my surroundings don’t want Timoshenko, and now, in my opinion, she’s not doing herself any favors. Yatsenyuk (current Prime Minister of Ukraine), by the way, is very likable, I’d vote for him open-heartedly. But if Poroshenko leaves him as Prime Minister, that would be awesome. 

27 jul 2014

